README.md, before:

# A framework for capturing indirect impacts in site-level screening for biodiversity risks

Divya Narain<sup>a</sup>, Jacob Bedford<sup>b</sup>, Elspeth
Grace<sup>b</sup>, Alfred Muge<sup>b</sup>, Aime Rankin<sup>b</sup>,
Matt Jones<sup>b</sup>, Sebastian Dunnett<sup>b</sup>

<sup>a</sup>Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University
of Oxford

<sup>b</sup>UN Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring
Centre, Cambridge, UK

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.17093377.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17093377)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.16997585.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16997585)

> Site-based industrial operations such as mining, oil and gas
> extraction, and renewable energy development are associated with many
> direct and indirect impacts on biodiversity. Consideration of the full
> range of these impacts when selecting a buffer distance to approximate
> Area of Influence (AoI) of a project is critical for effective
> biodiversity risk screening. Indirect impacts, however, are elusive
> despite often being more extensive than direct ones, both temporally
> and spatially. There is also limited clarity on the distinction
> between direct and indirect impacts, leading to the latter either
> being missed from screening analyses, or misclassified as direct
> impacts. Here we propose a definition of indirect impacts and a
> framework for incorporating them in risk and impact analyses. We
> define indirect impacts as those that are triggered by wider
> socio-economic and demographic changes induced by the project and not
> directly by project operations. Indirect impacts manifest through
> three pathways: increased access to intact ecosystems, increased
> in-migration and settlement, and increased viability of other economic
> activity. A range of factors, however, can act as predictors of the
> likelihood and intensity of indirect impacts and form the basis of a
> decision-making framework to select a buffer that captures their AoI
> effectively.

This repository contains supporting code for a manuscript accepted for
publication at *Methods in Ecology and Evolution*. A link to this paper
will be added when published.

The processing script, *aoi_decision_layer.R* takes six data inputs to
produce a raster screening layer that supports the assessment of project
indirect impacts. To reproduce the analysis, researchers must first
acquire the six input datasets from source:

| Dataset | Link | Variant used | Copyright |
|----|----|----|----|
| Global roadless areas | <https://roadless.online/data/> | Global shapefile | Open Data Commons Open Database Licence (ODbL) |
| Global Human Settlement Model grid (GHS-SMOD) | <https://human-settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/download.php?ds=smod> | 1km in Mollweide projection | CC BY |
| Global gridded GDP data | <https://zenodo.org/records/16741980> | 2020 total GDP at 30arcsecs | CC BY |
| Travel time to cities | <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7638134.v4> | “travel_time_to_cities_9.tif”, i.e. settlements over 50,000 | CC BY |
| Global human modification dataset | <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14502572> | “HMv20240801_2022s_AA_300.tif”, i.e. all threats combined | CC BY |
| Critical Habitat | <https://doi.org/10.34892/snwv-a025> | Basic | CC BY |

The accompanying script, *aoi_plot.R*, allows researchers to recreate
figures in the paper.

Output data are on Zenodo
[here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16997584).

Commit message:

added link to archived code

README.md, after:

# A framework for capturing indirect impacts in site-level screening for biodiversity risks

Divya Narain<sup>a</sup>, Jacob Bedford<sup>b</sup>, Elspeth
Grace<sup>b</sup>, Alfred Muge<sup>b</sup>, Aime Rankin<sup>b</sup>,
Matt Jones<sup>b</sup>, Sebastian Dunnett<sup>b</sup>

<sup>a</sup>Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University
of Oxford

<sup>b</sup>UN Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring
Centre, Cambridge, UK

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.17093377.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17093377)

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.16997585.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16997585)

> Site-based industrial operations such as mining, oil and gas
> extraction, and renewable energy development are associated with many
> direct and indirect impacts on biodiversity. Consideration of the full
> range of these impacts when selecting a buffer distance to approximate
> Area of Influence (AoI) of a project is critical for effective
> biodiversity risk screening. Indirect impacts, however, are elusive
> despite often being more extensive than direct ones, both temporally
> and spatially. There is also limited clarity on the distinction
> between direct and indirect impacts, leading to the latter either
> being missed from screening analyses, or misclassified as direct
> impacts. Here we propose a definition of indirect impacts and a
> framework for incorporating them in risk and impact analyses. We
> define indirect impacts as those that are triggered by wider
> socio-economic and demographic changes induced by the project and not
> directly by project operations. Indirect impacts manifest through
> three pathways: increased access to intact ecosystems, increased
> in-migration and settlement, and increased viability of other economic
> activity. A range of factors, however, can act as predictors of the
> likelihood and intensity of indirect impacts and form the basis of a
> decision-making framework to select a buffer that captures their AoI
> effectively.

This repository contains supporting code for a manuscript accepted for
publication at *Methods in Ecology and Evolution*. A link to this paper
will be added when published.

The processing script, *aoi_decision_layer.R* takes six data inputs to
produce a raster screening layer that supports the assessment of project
indirect impacts. To reproduce the analysis, researchers must first
acquire the six input datasets from source:

| Dataset | Link | Variant used | Copyright |
|----|----|----|----|
| Global roadless areas | <https://roadless.online/data/> | Global shapefile | Open Data Commons Open Database Licence (ODbL) |
| Global Human Settlement Model grid (GHS-SMOD) | <https://human-settlement.emergency.copernicus.eu/download.php?ds=smod> | 1km in Mollweide projection | CC BY |
| Global gridded GDP data | <https://zenodo.org/records/16741980> | 2020 total GDP at 30arcsecs | CC BY |
| Travel time to cities | <https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7638134.v4> | “travel_time_to_cities_9.tif”, i.e. settlements over 50,000 | CC BY |
| Global human modification dataset | <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14502572> | “HMv20240801_2022s_AA_300.tif”, i.e. all threats combined | CC BY |
| Critical Habitat | <https://doi.org/10.34892/snwv-a025> | Basic | CC BY |

The accompanying script, *aoi_plot.R*, allows researchers to recreate
figures in the paper.

The archived code at point of acceptance is on Zenodo
[here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17093376) and output data are
[here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16997584).
